# Metaphysics of causality

While the mathematical theory of probability is well-developed and its axioms and main definitions have remained stable for a number of years, there is no consensus regarding the mathematisation of causality. Neither is there much agreement as to what causality is. We explore some of the array of opinions on the nature of causality.
There are three varieties of position on causality. One can argue that the concept of causality is of heuristic use only and should be eliminated from scientific discourse: this was the tack pursued by Bertrand Russell, who maintained that science appeals to functional relationships rather than causal laws. Alternatively one can argue that causality is a fundamental feature of the world and should be treated as a scientific primitive—this claim is usually the result of disillusionment with purported philosophical analyses, several of which appeal to the asymmetry of time in order to explain the asymmetry of causation, a strat- egy that is unattractive to those who want to analyse time in terms of causality. Or one can maintain that causal relations can be reduced to other concepts not involving causal notions. This latter position is dominant in the philosophical literature, and there are four main approaches which can be described roughly as follows.
We will suppose here that causality is a relation between variables and that these variables are single-case or repeatable according to the interpretation of causality in question. An interpretation of causality is mental if it views causality as a feature of an agent’s epistemic state and physical if a feature of the world external to an agent. An interpretation is subjective if two agents with the same background knowledge can disagree as to causal relationships yet both be correct, and objective if causal relationships are not a matter of arbitrary choice. 
The mechanistic account of causality aims to understand the physical processes that link cause and effect, interpreting causal statements as saying something about such processes. Wesley Salmon and Phil Dowe are two influential proponents of this type of position. They argue that a causal process is one that transmits or possesses a conserved physical quantity, such as energy-mass, linear momentum or charge, from start (cause) to finish (effect).
